[Music]
four to nineteen folks they've got to
have a play as times ticking away
because they've got to stay in this ball
game I've got a win they come out lined
up in a empty set three receivers to the
right two to the left
defense looks like they're going to man
up with no safety this is the exact
offensive matchup that they want the
best receiver lined up against the
linebacker quarterback steps back to
receive the ball five yards deep in the
gun he takes the snap drops three steps
he plants his back foot he's looking for
an opening there's a blitz coming off
the edge he steps up to avoid the rush
he's looking downfield he's got the
inside receiver making a cut he's got to
step on the linebacker the quarterback
has a bead on he lets the ball go it's
in their receivers out in front of the
defender he's got him beat he's out in
front racing for the ball it's coming
down he cradles it at the 15 he's at the
10 5 touchdown unbelievable play now
wait a minute
of course it's believable it's physics
specifically the differences between
scalars and vectors so we just see that
quarterback steps back to receive the
ball five yards deep in the gun stop see
measurements are defined as two
different quantities scalars or
measurements with only numbers and
vectors or measurements with Direction
for example when that quarterback takes
the snap he's five yards away but from
where back from the line of scrimmage so
the five yards by itself is a scalar
quantity when you add a direction like
five yards deep it becomes a vector
quantity five yards scalar five yards
deep vector okay go ahead he takes the
snap drops three steps he plants his
back foot he's looking for an opening
there's a blitz coming off the edge he
steps up to avoid the rush whoa here's a
difference between distance and
displacement distance is a measurement
without identifying where he moved into
scalar quantity when the quarterback
makes a three-step drop he moves about
three yards back when he moves about
another three yards forward when he
steps up into the pocket so that
quarterback moves a total of six yards
that's a distance that's a scalar now
this placement is a vector quantity
describing about how far out of place
the object is so the quarterback draw
back for yards and move back forward
three yards he's in the exact same place
where he started
so his displacement is zero yards
distance six yards displacement zero
yards so let's look what happened next
the quarterback has a bead on he lets
the ball go it's in their receivers out
for the defender stop
so here's speed and velocity but let's
just do one thing at a time so speed is
measurement without direction it's a
scalar quantity velocity is a vector
quantity
it's that object speed but with a
direction of motion so the receiver
accelerates away gaining both speed and
distance this takes the receiver five
seconds to run those 50 yards so his
average speed in any given time is 10
yards per second the linebacker tries to
keep up but his overall speed is slower
he only goes 35 yards in those five
seconds so this average speed is only
seven yards per second they're both
traveling in a forward direction so
their velocity is also positive you
can't go from resting to your peak speed
immediately you've got to build up to it
this is acceleration at first the
linebacker can keep up with that
receiver but eventually the faster
receiver pulls away
that's acceleration the change in speed
over time acceleration is a vector
quantity
it describes the rate in which of object
changes velocity like velocity
acceleration is a vector it happens in a
direction so let's just look at that
plank just one more time quarterback
steps back to receive the ball five
yards deep in the gun vector he takes a
step drops three steps he plants his
back foot he's looking for an opening
there's a blitz coming off the edge he
steps up to avoid the rush displacement
he's got the inside receiver making a
cut he's got to step on the linebacker
the quarterback has a bead on he lets
the ball go it's in their receivers on
further defender velocity he's got him
beat he's out in front racing for the
ball it's coming down he cradles it at
the 15 he's at the damn top accelerate
touchdown unbelievable play that was a
great play as time expired resulting in
the touchdown and ultimately the win and
pure every and pure science